.\" NFSv4 Access Control Lists manual pages
.\" format with: groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\" 
.\" http://www.delorie.com/gnu/docs/groff/groff_37.html
.\" http://www.schweikhardt.net/man_page_howto.html
.\" 
.TH NFS4XDR_GETFACL 1 "version 0.3.3, August 2008" "Linux" "NFSv4 Access Control Lists"
.SH NAME
nfs4xdr_getfacl \- get NFSv4 file/directory access control lists
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nfs4xdr_getfacl [-invH]
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nfs4_getfacl 
will display the NFSv4 Access Control List (ACL) for 
.I file 
(a file or directory), provided 
.I file 
is on a filesystem exposing NFSv4 ACLs as a system.nfs4_acl_xdr xattr.

This version provides output compatible getfacl and setfacl on FreeBSD,
and is enhanced to provide support for viewing and managing ACL features
present in the NFSv4.1.

If the
.BR -H / --more-help
flag is specified, 
.B nfs4xdr_getfacl
will print some information about NFSv4 ACLs and the fields used in ACEs.  

The following options are available:
.TP
.BR "-i" , " --append-id"
Append numerical ID at the end of each entry containing named principal.
.TP
.BR "-n" , " --numeric"
Display user and group IDs numerically rather than converting to a user or group name.
.TP
.BR "-q" , " --quiet"
Do not write commented information about file name and ownership.
.TP
.BR "-v" , " --verbose"
Display access mask and flags in verbose form.
.TP

The output format for an NFSv4 file ACL, e.g., is:
.RS
.nf
         everyone@:r-x-----------:-------:allow
            group@:rwx-----------:-------:allow
        group:root:rwxpDdaARWcCos:fdin---:allow
group:builtin_users:rwxpDdaARWcCos:fd-----:allow
group:builtin_users:r--p------c---:fd-----:allow
            owner@:rwxpD-aARWcCos:-------:allow
.fi
.RE

Refer to the 
.BR nfs4xdr_acl (5)
manpage for detailed information about NFSv4 ACL terminology and syntax. 
.SH AUTHORS
.B nfs4_getfacl
was initially written by people at CITI, the Center for Information Technology Integration
.RI ( http://www.citi.umich.edu ).

.B nfs4xdr_getfacl
expands on this work by providing userspace management features for local filesystems
that support NFSv4 ACLs.

.SH CONTACT
Please send bug reports, feature requests, and comments to
.RI < dev@ixsystems.com >.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nfs4xdr_setfacl "(1), " nfs4xdr_acl (5),
.IR RFC5661 " Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol."
